The passing of time, the setbacks, the adjournments, the deficiencies and indecencies of some... All this cannot affect the depth of our grief. The grief of being deprived of the intelligence, talent and goodness of those who are no longer here. So we look for a meaning. It is the only way to bear it. A meaning to what happened. A meaning to this trial.  
 
It has been epic, tragic, tormented. It has triggered the fury of the world. It has been punctuated by attacks. It has given us the moving words of the victims and it has lost us in the accused’s attempts to explain themselves. Its meaning is obviously, first of all, to judge these accused. It is to demonstrate that the law takes precedence over strength. All this is already massive, and in any trial it would be enough. But not here. Not with respect to the crimes committed. The attacks on Hyper Cacher and Charlie [Hebdo] are not just crimes. They have a political, philosophical, metaphysical significance. They converge towards the same idea, they have the same goal. When Coulibaly kills Jews, he does not just kill Jews, he kills the other. Charlie Hebdo too, is the other. The meaning of these crimes is the annihilation of the other, of difference. If we do not respond to that, we will have stopped on our way.  

The purpose of this court is not to protect freedom and alterity. Yet, just as you have organized this trial in two parts, that of the victims and that of the accused, you must accept that there are two trials in one. The trial of the accused and the trial of the ideas they intended to murder. These famous republican values have been shaken. These crimes are not crimes like any other and this trial cannot be a trial like any other. It must take into account its symbolic dimension. And my role, as lawyer for Charlie Hebdo, will be to attach myself to this second aspect.  

I am not pleading for history. I do not give a damn about history. I want to plead for today, not tomorrow. For the men of here and now, not for the historians of the future. The future is like the sky, it is virtual. It is up to us, and to us alone, to commit ourselves, to reflect, and sometimes to take risks in order to remain free to be what we want. It is up to us, and to no one else, to find the words, and to pronounce them so that they cover the sound of the knives under our throats. It is up to us to laugh, to draw, to enjoy our freedoms, in the face of fanatics who will want to impose their world of neuroses and frustrations on us. It is up to us to fight to remain free. This is what is at stake today.  

Staying free means being able to say what we want about our beliefs without being threatened with death, shot by Kalashnikovs or beheaded. Yet this is no longer the case in our country today. During this trial, a teacher has been cut in half. During this trial, a teacher has been killed in a church. Someone has been atrociously wounded in Nicolas-Appert Street [where Charlie Hebdo was previously headquartered]. Threats have been made in several communiqués, including one from Al-Qaeda.  

The message of these terrorists is clear. They tell us: your words, your indignation are useless. We will continue to kill you. Your judges, your trials, are indifferent. Your laws are jokes, we will only respond to those of Heaven. They tell us to give up freedom because a knife and a cleaver will be stronger than 67 million Frenchmen, an army and a police force. It is the weapon of fear to make us surrender a way of life built over centuries. And of course, it will not stop at caricatures, not even at freedom of expression. They hate our freedoms. They will not stop, because we are one of the few peoples in the world to be the bearers of a universalism that is opposed to theirs.  

How did we get to this point? What is this new kind of war in which cartoonists fight with their pencils, and teachers with their blackboards, some fanatics armed with Kalashnikovs or butcher's utensils? By what tangle of ideas, speeches and wanderings have we reached the point in which, for the first time in the West since the end of World War II, a newspaper has been decimated, before having to hide in a bunker at a secret address? Who fed the crocodile hoping to be the last to be eaten? Because it is always the same thing: when faced with fear, some people choose to make a deal.   

The story I am going to tell you is the story of all of us. It is partly, gentlemen, the one that brought you into these cubicles, so I hope it will be of interest.  

The countdown started in Amsterdam on November 2, 2004. Theo Van Gogh was an unfriendly journalist and filmmaker. In 2004, he directed Submission to denounce the submission of women in Islam. On November 2, 2004, he was shot in an Amsterdam street with eight bullets in the body by a young Islamist with a takfirist tendency [a sub-branch of Salafism]. He was then slaughtered and he was stabbed in the chest with two daggers. On one of these daggers contained death threats against the Jews. This is the matrix of 2015 and its two obsessions: freedom of expression and anti-Semitism.    

Following this assassination, another writer, Danish this time, Kare Bluitgen, wanted to write a didactic book on the life of Muhammad addressed to younger audiences. He looked for an illustrator. Everyone refused. Fear had already won. So, on September 17, 2005, he wrote in a newspaper to denounce self-censorship whenever it touches upon Islam. Flemming Rose, editor-in-chief of Jyllands-Posten’s culture pages, a center-right newspaper comparable to Le Figaro in our country, asked the Danish cartoonists' syndicate how would they represent prophet Muhammad. These cartoons were published on September 30, 2005, and for two months, not much happened.  

This affair only assumed its true dimension because of a fraud against religion, committed by Danish imams of the Muslim Brotherhood, mainly salafists. In December 2005, these imams went around Arab capitals to mobilize Muslim states against these nasty Islamophobic Danes. And to prove it, they constituted a file, which included the cartoons. This file, we recovered it.  

The problem is that in this file, they added three drawings that had not been published [Mr. Malka shows them]. Two of them come from a website of raving lunatics, some white American supremacists. Another comes from France, it has nothing to do with Islam, it is a drawing on the *Fête du cochon* [the pig festival] in Tulle in Corrèze. And the imams say: "This is how Islam is represented in the West." And then, of course, on the basis of such deception, of such mystification, the world was set on fire. Demonstrations erupt, people get killed, flags are burnt. They have lit the fire and yet they call us arsonists? So yes, it is hard to be loved by fundamentalist morons, but it is even sadder to be used by swindlers!  

Then comes the time of political recuperation. In January 2006, the very official Organization of the Islamic Cooperation, which groups 57 countries, seized the UN and asked it to compel all the countries in the world to ban criticism of religions. This is how a swindle will try to obtain a modification of international law on freedom of expression!  

And that is when we started feeding the crocodile. On February 3, 2006, Sheikh Al-Qaradawi, spiritual leader of the Muslim Brotherhood, declared a "Day of Wrath". On the same day, Jacques Chirac, Bill Clinton and UN Secretary General Kofi Annan declared that "the newspapers that helped circulate the cartoons abused freedom of speech" and called for greater respect of religious feelings.  

It has come to this point: the world has given in to obscurantism, the truth has been covered by lies. And those who hated our freedoms have smelled the blood of our democracies, it gave them an appetite. Al-Qaradawi's operation was a complete success.  

This story of the cartoons, we must know it. We must repeat it, we must teach it. Does [Canadian Prime Minister] Justin Trudeau know this story, he who during this trial was lecturing us in reasonable accommodations? Does [Turkish President Recep Tayyip] Erdogan, who lectures us in anti-racism, know this story? Do they know that all this was not committed by us?  

But the machine eventually jammed. The political scheme did not go all the way. France Soir published the cartoons in France, its director [Jacques Lefranc] was immediately fired, and Charlie Hebdo took those cartoons back and published them again out of solidarity. In 2007, the UOIF [Union of Islamic Organizations of France] and the mosque of Paris sued us, and we won the case. We thought we had won. In fact, we had won nothing at all.  

One more thing needs to be known. The whole world thinks that the trial of the cartoons took place in France. The first trial took place in Denmark, with the same result. But nobody cared about it. And why was that? Because France has a special history. Because it is the first country in the world to have banned blasphemy from the Penal Code. That was in 1791. The same year as the decree on the equality of Jews. I do not know why, but these two issues are still linked, for better or worse.  

Hence, I will tell you the history of blasphemy in France.  

In 1789, freedom of expression was proclaimed as one of man's most precious rights. Two years later, blasphemy was removed from the penal code. In 1881, the great law on freedom of the press was passed. The debates raged in the Assembly and it is striking to see how much they focused on those of today: drawing and religion. It is as if Charlie Hebdo already existed! "God will defend himself well, he does not need the Chamber of Deputies for that! "Clemenceau replied to the Bishop of Angers, who invoked the wounds of outraged Catholics.  

So you see, we have no choice. To renounce the free criticism of religions, to renounce the caricatures of prophet Muhammad, would be to renounce our history, the Encyclopedia, the great laws of the Republic. To give up teaching that man is descended from the ape and not from a dream. To renounce equality for women, who are not half the number of men, equality for homosexuals, when, strangely enough, in 72 countries in the world, the same or about the same as those that still have legislation against blasphemy, homosexuality is still an abomination.  

It would be giving up the indomitable human liberty by living in chains. It would be to renounce that wonderful right to piss off God, Mr. President [magistrate of the tribunal]. Charlie Hebdo cannot renounce it, and we will never, ever, ever renounce it. This is Charlie Hebdo. It is our right, it is recognized by the courts. And beyond our national courts, by the ECHR [European Court of Human Rights], which binds hundreds of millions of people and says exactly the same.  

But then how do we get Islam out of this? Should it be taken out of the republican pact? Should we have to say, no, there is only one religion that should be given special treatment, that we could not caricature, and that would be Islam? That's not possible. Charlie Hebdo's fight is also a fight for the normalization of Islam. It is a struggle to make this religion look like any other. That we treat it like any other. To make it an exception is obviously the worst service we could do for it. You cannot bring a religion out of equality. Religions must be the objects of satire, and in the words of Salman Rushdie, of "our intrepid disrespect."  

We are blamed for caricatures of religions. But in reality, we have never done so. This is not true. All the caricatures we have talked about here are not caricatures of religion, they are caricatures of religious fanaticism, of the irruption of religion in the political sphere.  

Now I come to the story of Charlie, the legal person I am representing. In 1960, we lived in the corseted France of General de Gaulle. Cavanna met Choron, they decided to create a transgressive newspaper to shake up morals, a newspaper essentially made of drawings, it is Hara-Kiri. The initial slogan of this newspaper was: "If you can't buy it, steal it." Cabu then joined them, and then Gébé, Topor, Wolinski, Reiser. 1970, is year of the ban.  

On November 1st, there was a fire, 146 died in a discotheque. On November 9, General de Gaulle died [in Colombey-les-Deux-Eglises]. And on November 16, Hara-Kiri headlined its front page "Tragic Ball at Colombey, one dead man". It did not please at all the Interior Minister of the time, Raymond Marcellin, who owes his own posterity only thanks to the ban of Hara-Kiri.  

At the time, there was a monthly "Charlie," directed by Wolinski, and we decided to decline it as a weekly publication. That is to say that the very basis of Charlie's existence is the censorship of its ancestor.  And its first issue was be devoted to censorship. It is the DNA of this paper.  

Then comes 1981, the left has taken power, it was no longer the time for transgression, the paper's sales collapsed, ten years of interruption. 1992, under the leadership of Philippe Val, the team reconvened. Cabu, Wolinski, Gébé, Cavanna and Renaud, the singer, decided to relaunch Charlie Hebdo, this is the formula you know today. And I remember writing the statutes of this newspaper - probably badly, I was 23 years old. In a sad irony of history, its creators had decided to call the publishing company of this newspaper the "Kalashnikov Company."  

Under the leadership of Philippe Val, the paper became a breeding ground for talents. Mixing ancients and moderns, Siné, Joann Sfar, Jul, Riad Sattouf, Catherine Meurisse, Fourest, Corcuff, Polac, Cavanna, Gébé, so many others have passed through it. It has become an incredibly rich journal. Crises, ruptures, psychodramas, there have been so many that I cannot remember. But there was one point on which everyone always agreed: freedom of expression, free criticism of religions, not criticism of people because of their religion, that is something else, that is racism or anti-Semitism. But the free criticism of ideas, opinions, beliefs.  

And then came the attack. And this paper keeps supporting this particular laughter, and this paper continues to live. It lives in a bunker, but it lives. It lives surrounded by policemen, but it lives. It lives with collaborators who can no longer travel with their spouses and children, but it lives. It lives under threats, it lives with the disappeared and the wounded, it lives with the thousands of difficulties, it lives thanks to its readers, it lives thanks to that wonderful banality of good, it lives thanks to the help of all those, anonymous, who come to its aid every day, it lives also thanks to those you have seen at your helm, and who live more intensely and more deeply than we do.  

They could kill all of us, but it would be useless, because Charlie has become an idea. And Charlie could disappear today, that idea would still be alive. You cannot kill an idea, it’s not even worth trying. Charlie Hebdo, you have made it a symbol! You turned it into an idea! We will not kill it anymore.  

This trial has been a tremendous catalyst for history. During this trial, a republican Islam has emerged in this country, with new voices, and I am thinking in particular of the rector of the [Great] Mosque of Paris [Chems-Eddine Hafiz], who was my opponent, since he was a lawyer in 2006 at the time of the trial of the cartoons of prophet Muhammad, and who today is developing a magnificent and courageous speech that in turn has earned him threats. He tells us that we must accept the right to caricature, and it is important that he says so.  

Political speeches are no longer the same either, they have evolved. There are far fewer accusations of Islamophobia. Things are moving, there is an awakening of consciences. This trial will have contributed to that, and as such, it will have been historic.  

So these three months have been tragic, difficult… We may well make the most of them. We may well make sure they do not make us lose our dreams, our ideals, lest we turn our backs on our history, lest we become the generation that abandoned the history I told you, that abandoned its dreams, its ideals, its dreams of liberty and free speech.  
